Here we go.
Cardiff Carnival 25th Anniversary Project, Steve Fletcher, interviewer.
Nigel Watson, interviewee.
The venue, Swicker office.
The date, Sunday the 19th of October 2014.
Nigel, for the record, would you spell your full name, please?
Nigel, James, J-A-M-E-S, Watson, W-A-T-S-O-N.
Thanks very much indeed.
Before I founded Swicker, back in 1990, I had the most fabulous and transformative
cultural experience with a fabulous group called Theatre Taliesin Wales.
Nigel was the founder of that group and artistic co-director.
Please tell us more about Theatre Taliesin Wales, who were they and what did they do?
Right. Well, the first thing to establish is that I founded the company with a dear friend and
colleague who is still a dear friend and colleague, Stuart Cox, who has been living in Mexico for 13
years. I'm very profoundly pleased to say that we're working on a project together in Cuba at
the moment. That we had worked together, we'd met and worked together in the 70s in Triple Action
Theatre and then we'd worked together under the first company I formed called Theatre Saga here.
And we had wanted to look initially at simply developing a one-man show that we would jointly
script and that I would perform and Stuart would direct. And so initially it was planned to be in
fact a double project in Sri Lanka that we would mount a project about the Welsh shaman and non-conformist
William Price and that we would do a children's show to go with that. And we wanted to explore
the very fertile and rich Sri Lankan mask tradition. Neither of us had worked very extensively
with masks, so there was a technical aspect to this project. We got quite some work done,
we got quite some way towards a residency in the University of Colombo, British Council was supportive
and then the civil war broke out ferociously once again and the Foreign Office was saying we can't
offer you any kind of protection. So the project price went on the back burner and
we thought we developed for children and we came across a collection, a retelling of a collection of
very ancient Indian fables about a character called Dr. Bidpai. The stories were from a collection
called the Panchatantra which means the five treatises and go back to Buddhist times before
before Christ. And a good claim can be made for them that these stories have traveled in one form
or another because they're parables like Aesop involved in the story of the five
parables like Aesop involving talking animals and so on around the world. So we developed this as a
children's show and then decided that we added additional material and it became a family show
and then by reorientating material something for adults and toured widely, played in all manner of
places, lots of schools, lots of art centers and village halls, all kinds of venues.
Then we had the good fortune to have contact with the Bharatiya Vidya Bhavan, the Institute of Indian
Culture in West London where most unusually in India classical musicians do not play as accompanists
for theatre or dance shows. It simply isn't done, it's not part of the protocol.
Other musicians do that work and very fine they are but on this occasion due to our contacts and
due to the the chemistry being right, a sitar teacher and the tablet teacher both extremely
fine players in their own right agreed to part compose part improvise a score for the performance
and so in a way the apogee of performance was to tour with this and where possible
a double bill with a short concert an interval and then
a word in the stargazer's eye was the title that we made.
So that had a life in its various forms of something like five years and then after that we
had a very good positive response. Clearly I'm not ready to do another one man show so
we started to think about the possibilities of working given our passion for the Indian performing
arts with the variety of Asian communities on our doorstep in Cardiff and the most advanced
community manifestation of that was Samarja Cultural Centre, a cultural and religious centre
in Grangetown and we spent a year really supporting ourselves by other means
having at some point decided that we would give to promote a word in the stargazer's eye,
we would promote ourselves and give ourselves a company name and we talked about various options
and I had always been attracted by the shamanic nature of this legendary stroke actual bard with
poems from the sixth century but legends about whom existing from the middle ages certainly
perhaps they were much older that that turn constantly on the idea of transformation that's
what I mean when I say shamanic that that humans turn into animals and vice versa
and transforming is what performers do to varying degrees all the time in whatever mode they're
operating so this established first of all the kind of Welsh focus of the company and
and
as I say led us to spend a year negotiating with the Gujarati community and largely from
Kutch in western Gujarat about making a production with members of the community
in the Samarja so that took place in the company started in summer 84
and in 1986 we using the Irish and Welsh material at the root of the European Tristan and Ezell myth
Tristan and Ezold as it's most widely known through Wagner we use this material as a as a classic
eternal triangle between an old king and his young bride and a young lover and other adventures
with dragons and so on so together with a professional core and
a multilingual production that we rough scripted what there was in English and
staged together with something like
30 to 40 community participants of all ages and this production created quite a stir I think it
was the fair to say it's the first of this kind in Wales and we made a BBC radio documentary about
it there was a sort of a significant swell of interest in the ideas behind the premises
behind the project that we were using Welsh or pan-Celtic narrative material
of a sufficiently universal character to as a magnet to bring people around with a story that
they could relate to
and obviously that was the first of a trilogy of Indo-Celtic community plays it was after that
first play that you came and I think you actually visited me in London where I was working at the
time you explained about the success of Tristan and Ezold the first Indo-Celtic community play
certainly your passion for interculturalism and celebration and the intergenerational nature of
the vision that you laid before me when I was working in London was so strong that I thought
I better join you in this and I relocated to Cardiff in 1987 and well over to you what happened next
well we were of course very gratified by the warmth of the response to the project and
clearly the ideas that were almost assumed not in terms of simply of being citizens of the world but
of bringing together artistic techniques Welsh clogging and Gujarati folk dance and
Indian music and Indian music and scales from older Celtic music and Indian scales
the aesthetic issues were because they were practical ones how shall we do this where shall
somebody stand what how shall we make this particular kind of music together
were the primary practical questions and problems and challenges that working artists had to face
but with the kind of looking at the documentary or sorry the
the film footage and trying to think through some of the resonances that the production
gave rise to we I have to put it that way around that the the practical aesthetic challenges
were first because those we we couldn't shell but you had to deal with on a day-to-day basis that was
the nature of the work so then the wider resonances of what the work might represent
came after on reflection and thought well we've done this people seem to think it's a good thing
to do and they enjoyed the show and took its collaborative celebratory spirit to heart
we should go on and do another how do we extend expand develop mutate the idea without simply
repeating ourselves and not boxing ourselves into some kind of creative ghetto so as you say Steve
as you say Steve with your
workaholic presence helping to put the company on a on a on a more sensible
organizational and administrative and financial backing
we began to think about how we should extend it as I said and and the issue then of of
of perhaps bringing a company from India to work with a core of
Wales-based performers of whatever ethnicity and the community which wasn't closed it wasn't
or rather it wasn't open only to Gujarati but but the center itself was very open anybody could come
that was a basic condition that we set down for the collaboration and I don't think there was
any real difficulty with that there was certainly a long process of quite understandably because
this was a first and because I believe I'm right in saying that the city council had turned down
an application to financially support the building of the center so it was funded simply from
collections from the local community and so what became a center then to some degrees became a
fortress not only because of elements of gross racism and graffiti and so on but simply because
of the tendency for a community to turn in upon itself if there is not an active warm welcome
from the host community or so we broached the issue with the community elders and they thought it was
a good idea and so Stuart spent a time in the spring of 88 I think I'm right in saying or 87
and I in the autumn of 87 looking at traditional folk theaters in both north and southern
India I think it is um
it was very valuable for us to be able to draw some comparative picture of the state of
folk theater in India predominantly rural folk theater um in retrospect it seemed terrifyingly
obvious that we should have brought a Gujarati company so that the community would have been
able to speak to the performers and whilst that's what we did it's one of those things
that research throws up you don't the obvious isn't clear until you've been around the houses
you don't know what your own front door looks like until you've been into the next street so
following that research um arrangements were made for uh the predominant form in in Gujarat
called Bhavai which a company had never been outside India before to bring a something like
15 16 17 people a synthesis of two troops together with um their supporters and from
the administrative office from the National Theatre of India in Bombay to to bring a troop
to Wales to make a new production uh to tour shows of their own and and to create
as as big a splash as we could uh as an example of a living vibrant
non-classical traditional art form that at its grassroots level was still hugely popular
which meant that um companies Bhavai companies toured in rural Gujarat they would arrive at a
village uh perhaps at the weekend and would play a series of very brief extracts trailers
from their repertoire which was huge of both ballad operas and sung plays spoken plays and the
the villagers would choose which pieces they wanted to see so it was like cinema trailers
so this was an entirely fascinating tradition um a six and seven hundred year old tradition
terms of age that we're used to thinking about classical theater in Asia no in Japan and so on
but that had survived that stayed the same by changing as many populist and folk traditions
do by by continually updating and changing their material so they came to Wales where we
this time we chose the narrative material of Tumshan Khatti the Welsh bandit to outline a
problem that was unquestionably a problem in Wales in the 18th century and that still is in India where
um fathers and mothers have lots of sons and um they divide the farms down into smaller and smaller
dimensions and areas and units that become economically unviable and young his son simply
go off and they either go to the city or they become outlaws they they live by robbing and
stealing because farming is no longer an option so we developed this production with
greater degree of community participation there was a great deal of communal pride in
these artistic cousins coming from India and and and showing off if you like to Britain the the
some of the cultural riches of of the state of Gujarat
uh in particular and they toured their own shows and we we did a number of workshops with the
London International with lift the international festival for people and um BBC Wales made a tv
documentary and and so it made the event made a bigger splash as we hoped it would
um and by then I would think we were sort of making the work and doing the administration
but also trying to promote an active agenda of the virtues and the value of interculturalism of
people simply opening to others through participation in projects like this
is. So it was a spoken and sung in English, Welsh and Gujarati or Kutchis, Rusty,
piece which again produced a very positive reaction bigger waves I would say.
I think that I have to say that we had many supporters from the Welsh language community
but I think there were also it's fair to say um naysayers who found this
agenda a muddying of waters that they wished only to exist between Welsh speakers and English
speakers and um who in other words were simply wishing to edit out the reality of the multi-ethnic
communities of Swansea, Cardiff, Newport and a little bit in
Connors Quay in northeastern Wales that uh this didn't simply figure in their picture of Wales.
We understand the kind of cultural breakdown and talk about one individual's sense of what Wales
means to them what their Wales is uh and I was naive naive enough to be
shocked I think by some of the arguments sometimes heated arguments
um that uh I think in all soberness that uh reeked of um straightforward fascism.
I need to say that people who are saying these people should simply be deported or given the
opportunity at best to learn to speak fluent Welsh in one year. All those failing some kind of
test should be deported. I heard this from scores of people so it was some group of people's notion
of an agenda at that time so I'm simply wanting to draw attention to the fact that this this
reasonably enough ideas transformative ideas are never received smoothly and there were um
um people who were consciously against such an agenda.
Um the trilogy continued and and grew a pace I remember in particular as we moved on to the third
play that the the participatory elements and some of the tasters that Tally-Es-In some of the things
that Tally-Es-In, Tally-Es-In Wales were bringing to Cardiff for the first time
you know the whole idea of a multicultural community orchestra um I can remember organising
first ever Ghanaian drumming sessions as part of these projects um I think I am right when I suspect
the roots of Samba Galez are probably in there as well as we began to explore community percussion
in lots of different ways so um take us on to community play number three because
your observations are absolutely acute Steve in that that in and around and after Tumsun Katty
uh we were all very much well aware of simply the time it took to it would took at least a year to
develop the various strands to make beginning such a production feasible, organisational,
financial, particularly organisational but at the ground level that is to say in South Cardiff we
wanted to try to push a little bit or or um expand out from the samargin organising events
um in South Cardiff or anywhere really um that would function on their own function on their own
right but also hopefully feed into uh the the larger shows which would make community involvement
that much more real that much fuller and that's much more enjoyable so we ran
cross-cultural music concerts in chapter we ran a community orchestra we did projects in schools
including two that I remember with great and profound pleasure in a school for the deaf and
hearing impaired and sully one with a South Asian and um uh Welsh team and one with an African
Caribbean group um both particularly percussion and drum base that was received I have truly to
say ecstatically by the school the children many of whom were resident and the head teacher and it
was a great source of sorrow that we couldn't when the money ran out that we couldn't carry those on
that they're some of the projects that I feel proudest of so we were looking for opportunities
to to run dance classes drama classes um through the year to to to widen the net to to build the
the links of the web uh to connect more people with more people through art so that was a kind
of significant shift which meant that we were um working locally through the year on those kinds
of projects um taking on people because you can't do everything running projects uh one in a Welsh
language junior school in specifically in relation to some of the things I've just been saying um
um so I think that expansion of activity is an important
um growth and development probably between the second and third of this I'd call them a triad
more than a trilogy uh because they weren't they weren't uh directly thematically linked but they
were they were politically linked by the underlying premises of our intercultural
premise or premises and so the third piece
playing fast and loose with the legend of Madog uh the 13th century Welsh prince who sailed away
from north Wales and allegedly discovered America and that there is a memory with the
Mandan indigenous American people just west of the Mississippi of blue-eyed and blonde haired ancestors
uh that we involved not only other Asian groups the Punjabi um Bangra group of young people and
an African Caribbean young girls or teenage girls dance group as well as you were saying Steve a
sort of cross-cultural uh percussion group so we were looking at all kinds of resources and um
we had a dear colleague of mine whose early death saddens me as I speak of it uh Elvira Lewis
where else in the world would you have a minister who leads a double life as an actor it's
I'm sure there are elsewhere but it's a peculiarly kind of Welsh set of circumstances
and one of our South Asian supporters playing Queen Elizabeth singing um jailhouse rock
at the end of part one so that's what I mean by saying playing fast and loose with cultural
references and creating a kind of playground where men can play women anybody could be anybody
by adopting costumes by by mutual agreement by a set of circumstances affinities playground rules
of saying this is just like a children's dressing room where here are the costumes let's try on what
we like and see what kind of roles we might care to play out and so um in that the third piece was
a promenade uh the previous piece had been two-sided and four-sided seating in the
rectangular samarj but madhok was a promenade piece the audience stood and we simply acted amongst them
and the the premise that of anybody could be Welsh if as the historian who wrote the book
Gwynedd William said if you make his view as a marxist internationalist if you make a commit to
Wales what's the problem with being Welsh a view that we espoused and very glad that he came and
said a few words on the opening night of the show and was 100 behind the project
of making it globally available we speak largely in the current times about
on the one hand how
colossal theoretical sums of money pass in a nanosecond around the globe they're simply noughts
on a computer screen but the movement of peoples at the moment the focus is on
Africa and the Mediterranean and people drowning in boats globalization produces
changes some of which are difficult and challenging to deal with
as our ideas about what our work meant and what it might mean and what its potential significance
that it was a response to changing circumstances that in the intervening years have changed even
further this movement of peoples has not stopped it is simply one of the most significant features
of the world we live in like it or not that is the case and so I think that we hope artists have
their antennae out and are looking at social trends so whilst as artists I wouldn't pretend
that our priority wasn't with solving the aesthetic problems that we set ourselves
we were at in and of the same time and especially discussions with you Steve
continually sifting and resifting and thinking about how are people who are opposed to this
what might they think was this simply bigotry or fear of change which we all recognize in ourselves
of the people who came and said I couldn't recognize my own country at one of our performances
at which we we have to reflect on the kind of subjective nature of of what or confusing the
subjective and and the kind of officially approved view of Wales that you largely see
it for example it's one picture of Wales I'm not against it it's not illegitimate but it's not the
only one and it's that sense that that many projections and images overlap conflict yes they
do conflict but many overlap and that is the kind of kaleidoscopic social situation we were in then
and we were hoping the work would reflect so what seems to be quite clear is in terms of
Swicker's origins and again you know the birth of Cardiff Carnival that Theatre Taliesin Wales
certainly for me was a a fabulous eye-opener and that some of the central tenants that
I took and helped make the foundation for Swicker were the the interculturalism
the openness of spirit the importance of involving and being inclusive and accessible
and probably most important because these were fabulous groundbreaking works which still stand
the test of time today which was that the upbeat and ultimately life-affirming and
celebratory nature of what Theatre Taliesin was doing the the come down for the you know hundreds
who took part or watched particularly the participants at the end of a 10-week making
period for the theatre was massive and so it it it created it's shone a shone a beacon as to what
might be possible and could be possible in addition to all the great work with Taliesin
was doing so we're going to return to this conversation in a couple of weeks
Nigel can I thank you very much indeed for that you're most welcome Steve and I'd just like to
to conclude at length not too great a length by simply saying that even though it was difficult
for us at the time I think that the growth I my view of the growth of sugar is simply that
that I think like all good work in any form in the performing arts somehow if it's localized if it's
if it's based in a great spirit of place generates further ideas which ripple out
and in terms of our you know there were three of us really the organization couldn't sustain
the amount of work that people wanted to do and so that we split the company in two and thought
that that would be the best way forward to promote a specifically grassroots community events program
that could garner a great deal more money whilst we looked at at perhaps working abroad or
elsewhere where people said well why don't you come and do something with us
it didn't work out for Taliesin partly for health reasons and I should say that many people working
in new work experimental modes of performance groundbreaking there's often a great health
strain because three people did eight people's work for a long time and I don't wish to be
in any way mawkish but but this is true of so many organizations so the idea of modest financial
financial remuneration to to round the clock working easy to shrug at but it should be
remembered that these things don't happen without a certain level of obsessiveness by those people
involved and it takes its toll so I'm absolutely delighted to go on the record to say that I
congratulate Steve on his what 30 years 25 25 of swicker and and that the carnival mode that he
chose that seems to me the absolutely correct one to maximize all the kind of potential creativities
of its participants when I was talking about a room full of a children's room full of
costumes and masks and anything can be anything that could expand everybody's individual creativity
so I wish the company and if as long as he wants it another 25 years if he wants
it. Heartiest congratulations. Thank you very much. We're equally cursed and blessed by that I think.
Take care.